---
draft: true
title: Quotes
author: andrew
type: post
date: 2017-02-26T08:22:47+00:00
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
> You are not being judged, the value of what you are bringing to the audience is being judged. <cite>Seth Godin</cite>

> Simple and to the point is always the best way to get your point across. <cite>Guy Kawasaki</cite>

&#8220;The first time you say something, it&#8217;s heard; the second time, it&#8217;s recognized; the third time, it&#8217;s learned.&#8221; &#8211; John Maxwell

&#8220;It&#8217;s what you practice in private that you will be rewarded for in public.&#8221; &#8211; Tony Robbins
  
&#8220;Only the prepared speaker deserves to be confident.&#8221; &#8211; Dale Carnegie
  
&#8220;The first 30 seconds and the last 30 seconds have the most impact in a presentation.&#8221; &#8211; Patricia Fripp
  
&#8220;My best advice is to not start in PowerPoint. Presentation tools force you to think through information linearly, and you really need to start by thinking of the whole instead of the individual lines.&#8221; &#8211; Nancy Duarte
  
&#8220;Humans are completely incapable of reading and comprehending text on a screen and listening to a speaker at the same time. Therefore, lots of text (almost any text!), and long, complete sentences are bad, Bad, BAD.&#8221; &#8211; Garr Reynolds

&#8220;Speak like you talk, not like you write.&#8221; &#8211; Craig Valentine
  
&#8220;The worst speech you&#8217;ll ever give, will be far better than the one you never give.&#8221; &#8211; Fred Miller
  
&#8220;Your ability to communicate with others will account for fully 85% of your success in your business and in your life.&#8221; &#8211; Brian Tracy
  
&#8220;The single most important skill you must have to lead is the ability to tell your own story.&#8221; &#8211; Bo Eason
  
&#8220;Funny people aren&#8217;t funny because funny things happen to us. We&#8217;re funny because we take the tragedy that happens to us, and turn it into comedy.&#8221; &#8211; Judy Carter
  
&#8220;The only reason to give a speech is to change the world.&#8221; &#8211; Nick Morgan
  
&#8220;Picture yourself in a living room having a chat with your friends. You would be relaxed and comfortable talking to them, the same applies when public speaking.&#8221; &#8211; Richard Branson

## Motivation

“Your time is precious, so don’t waste it living someone else’s life.” – Steve Jobs

“It is not the mountain we conquer, but ourselves.” – Sir Edmund Hillary

## Leadership

“Leadership is the art of getting someone else to do something you want done because he wants to do it.” – Dwight Eisenhower

“A leader takes people where they want to go. A great leader takes people where they don’t necessarily want to go, but ought to be.” – Rosalynn Carter

“Don’t tell people how to do things, tell them what to do and let them surprise you with their results.” – George S. Patton Jr.

## Business

“Your most unhappy customers are your greatest source of learning.” – Bill Gates